<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="skyrimGreensburg.css" />
      <title>Skyrim</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h1>Modal XSLT, &lt;xsl:sort&gt;, and the translate() Function Through Skyrim</h1>
      <ul>
         <li><a href="#qe20">Assassination and theft of the Amulet</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe8">Assassins killed the Blades bodyguards</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe12">Effectively declare war on the Empire</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe34">He shattered the Amulet of Kings to become the avatar of the god Akatosh and do battle
               with Mehrunes Dagon</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe11">Made it out of the Imperial sewers</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe29">Martin opened the portal to Mankar Camoran's "Paradise"</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe26">Martin deciphered the Mysterium Xarxes</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe31">Martin Septim presented himself to the Elder Council to be crowned Emperor of all
               Tamriel</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe27">Mehrunes Dagon opened an Oblivion Gate outside Bruma</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe33">Mehrunes Dagon himself left Oblivion and entered Tamriel</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe32">Mehrunes Dagon launched an assault on the Imperial City, opening several Oblivion
               Gates within the capital itself</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe35">Mehrunes Dagon was defeated and sent back to Oblivion</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe7">Moment of prophecy</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe6">Pardoned the fortunate prisoner</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe3">'the Amulet of Kings' was destroyed</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe1">The assassination of Emperor Uriel Septim VII</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe4">The assassins first attacked the Emperor</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe36">The avatar of Akatosh was turned to stone</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe5">The Emperor made his way down to the dungeons</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe2">The Emperor Uriel Septim VII was assassinated</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe25">The Hero escaped with the Mysterium Xarxes itself</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe23">The Hero of Kvatch penetrated the Mythic Dawn's lair</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe28">The Hero of Kvatch saved the city and Martin by entering the gate and closing it</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe19">The Hero of Kvatch searched for the lost Amulet</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe21">The Hero of Kvatch was sent to locate the cult</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe14">The messenger was sent off to Kvatch</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe17">The prisoner and Martin returned to Weynon Priory</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe15">The prisoner arrived at Kvatch</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe16">The prisoner closed the gate</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe30">The Savior of Bruma travelled to this Paradise, killed Mankar Camoran, and returned
               with the Amulet of Kings</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe18">The three of them made their way to Cloud Ruler Temple</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe9">They struck down the Emperor himself</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe13">Took possession of the amulet</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe24">Trickery and disguise</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe10">Uriel Septim VII gave the Amulet of Kings to the prisoner</a></li>
         <li><a href="#qe22">Used the Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes</a></li>
      </ul>
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      <h3>The Oblivion Crisis</h3>
      
      <h4>by Praxis Sarcorum, Imperial Historian</h4>
      
      <p>A summary of the events stemming from <span id="qe1">the assassination of Emperor Uriel Septim VII</span></p>
      
      
      
      <p>At the turning of the Fourth Age, in the year 3E 433, <span id="qe2">the Emperor Uriel Septim VII was
            assassinated</span> and <span id="qe3">'the Amulet of Kings'
            was destroyed</span>. This set in motion a chain of events that would bring
         down an empire and change forever the relationship between man and the gods.
      </p>
      
      
      <p><span id="qe4">The assassins first attacked the
            Emperor</span> in the
         White Gold Tower. While the Blades held them back,
         <span id="qe5">the Emperor made his way down to the
            dungeons</span>, to a secret escape
         route built into one of the prison cells. For
         reasons known only to himself, the Emperor
         <span id="qe6">pardoned the fortunate prisoner</span> in that cell. Some say the
         prisoner reminded him of a childhood friend. Others say it was a <span id="qe7">moment of
            prophecy</span>. Whatever the case, the prisoner came to play a fateful role in the history of the
         Empire and Tamriel - surely a sign that
         the gods themselves were at work.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>The pursuing <span id="qe8">assassins killed the
            Blades bodyguards</span> in a relentless
         series of sneak attacks. Eventually <span id="qe9">they
            struck down the Emperor
            himself</span>. Before he fell, <span id="qe10">Uriel Septim VII gave the Amulet of Kings to
            the prisoner</span>, who somehow
         <span id="qe11">made it out of the Imperial sewers</span> and
         into the light of day.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>The assassination is now known to have been the work of a group of daedric cultists known as the Mythic Dawn. (Those who still suspect the Dark Brotherhood should consider two facts: first, they would have only
         needed a single assassin, not a small army of them; second, the Dark Brotherhood would never be so foolish as to
         <span id="qe12">effectively declare war on the Empire</span> and thus ensure their
         complete destruction. Witness the eventual fate of the Mythic
         Dawn.)
      </p>
      
      
      
      
      <p>The Amulet of Kings next surfaced at Weynon
         Priory near Chorrol. Jauffre, secret Grandmaster of the
         Blades and head of the
         priory, <span id="qe13">took possession of the
            amulet</span>. <span id="qe14">The messenger was sent off to Kvatch</span> to find a lowly priest named Martin.
         Unbeknownst even to himself, Martin was the bastard son of Uriel Septim VII, and the last heir to the Ruby
         Throne. He alone could use the
         Amulet of Kings to light the Dragonfires that wards the
         barrier between Tamriel and Oblivion, and save
         the world from the Mythic Dawn plot.
      </p>
      
      
      <p><span id="qe15">The prisoner arrived at Kvatch</span> to find it overrun by daedra that had poured in
         from a newly-opened Oblivion Gate, the start of the Empire-spanning devastation of
         the
         Oblivion Crisis. How <span id="qe16">the prisoner closed
            the gate</span> is not recorded. Once closed, Martin and the surviving Kvatch
         guardsmen drove back the daedra.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>Now known as the Hero of Kvatch, <span id="qe17">the prisoner and Martin
            returned to Weynon Priory</span>, only to find the
         priory sacked and the Amulet taken.
         Jauffre survived the attack, however, and
         <span id="qe18">the three of them
            made their way to Cloud Ruler Temple</span>, bastion of
         the Blades. This secret fortress in
         the mountains outside Bruma is
         where Martin was held safe while
         <span id="qe19">the Hero of Kvatch searched for the lost
            Amulet</span>.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>Knowing only that a mysterious group called the Mythic
         Dawn was behind the <span id="qe20">assassination and theft of the
            Amulet</span>, <span id="qe21">the Hero of Kvatch was sent to locate
            the cult</span>. With the help of
         Baurus, a Blade in the
         service of the Emperor, they somehow <span id="qe22">used the
            Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes</span>,
         esoteric works by the madman Mankar Camoran,
         to direct them to the Mythic Dawn's secret lair. Scholars
         familiar with the Commentaries claim the location is not directly
         mentioned in them. How they did this remains a mystery.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>No official records exist of how <span id="qe23">the Hero of
            Kvatch penetrated the Mythic Dawn's lair</span>
         near Lake Arrius. There is a bardic tale that claims the Hero used <span id="qe24">trickery and disguise</span>, but
         that is just speculation.What was discovered there is that Mankar Camoran was behind the Mythic Dawn, and that the group worshiped the daedric prince Mehrunes Dagon. Mankar
         Camoran believed himself to
         be a direct descendant of the Camoran Usurper, the infamous
         pretender to the throne of Valenwood.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>Somehow <span id="qe25">the Hero escaped with the
            Mysterium Xarxes itself</span>, the holy book of
         the Mythic Dawn cult. Mankar Camoran fled to Oblivion with the
         Amulet of Kings. With some effort and great risk to
         his sanity, <span id="qe26">Martin deciphered the Mysterium
            Xarxes</span> and intended to use it to open a gateway
         to Mankar Camoran in order to recover the
         Amulet of Kings.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>Before Martin could perform the ritual
         to open the gateway, <span id="qe27">Mehrunes
            Dagon opened an Oblivion Gate outside Bruma</span>. <span id="qe28">The Hero of
            Kvatch saved the city and Martin
            by entering the gate and closing it</span> before a daedric siege engine could destroy Bruma
         and Cloud Ruler Temple. Many songs and stories have been told of
         this battle and I will not retell them here. The Hero of Kvatch was now also known as the Savior of Bruma.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>With the city and Cloud Ruler
         Temple safe, <span id="qe29">Martin
            opened the portal to Mankar Camoran's
            "Paradise"</span>. The details of what transpired in
         this place have not been recorded. All that is known is that
         <span id="qe30">the Savior of Bruma travelled to this Paradise,
            killed Mankar Camoran, and returned with
            the Amulet of Kings</span>.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>With the Amulet in hand, <span id="qe31">Martin Septim presented himself to the Elder
            Council to be crowned Emperor of all
            Tamriel</span>. Once crowned he planned to relight the Dragonfires and seal
         Tamriel from Oblivion. In a last-ditch
         attempt to stop him, <span id="qe32">Mehrunes Dagon launched an assault on the
            Imperial City, opening several Oblivion Gates
            within the capital itself</span>. Uncrowned,
         Martin joined the battle in the city streets.
      </p>
      
      
      <p><span id="qe33">Mehrunes Dagon himself
            left Oblivion and entered
            Tamriel</span>, breaking the covenant. Only the unlit
         Dragonfires allowed this to be possible. Now that the barrier was ripped asunder,
         it was
         too late to relighting the Fires. Martin
         Septim chose to make the ultimate sacrifice - <span id="qe34">he shattered the Amulet of
            Kings to become the avatar of the god
            Akatosh and do battle with Mehrunes
            Dagon</span>.
      </p>
      
      
      <p>Records of this battle vary wildly. What we do know is that
         <span id="qe35">Mehrunes Dagon was
            defeated and sent back to Oblivion</span>.
         <span id="qe36">The avatar of Akatosh was
            turned to stone</span> and can be seen to this day in the Temple of
         the One in the Imperial City. With the
         Amulet gone, the Dragonfires quenched, and the last
         Dragonblood Emperor dead, the barrier to Oblivion is sealed
         forever.
      </p>
      
      <span id="padSpan"></span></body>
</html>